# Affective Polarization

**Affective polarization** refers to the tendency of individuals to view their own political group positively and opposing groups negatively, in ways that not only reflect partisan identity but also influence the formation and interpretation of political beliefs. This project began in 2024 as part of the Mathematics Clinic at the Institute of Mathematical Sciences at Claremont Graduate University in collaboration with the Information Sciences Institute at the University of Southern California.

Our research builds on the network algorithm model developed by Buddhika Nettasinghe, Ashwin Rao, Bohan Jiang, Allon G. Percus, and Kristina Lerman, published in 2025 and expanded upon by Buddhika Nettasinghe, Allon G. Percus, and Kristina Lerman, also in 2025. The authors examine affective polarization, where individuals exhibit **in-group favoritism** (trusting and supporting like-minded individuals) and **out-group animosity** (distrusting and disliking those with opposing views). To analyze the evolution of polarization, they use an affective polarization algorithm on both **complete graphs** and **stochastic block models** (SBM) to simulate the evolution of beliefs in social networks.

SBM is a natural choice for a network model to simulate affective polarization, because affective polarization operates on group identies, and SBM generates networks with well-defined group structures. Complete graphs are a common choice as a baseline for comparison when attempting to isolate the effects of network structures. By utilizing SBM and complete graphs as the network models on which to apply their polarization algorithm, their research provides an important milestone in the study of affective polarization on networks. However, it leaves open the question of how other network structures might influence the evolution of opinions on a network. 

Our study applies the same polarization algorithm used by Nettasinghe *et al* to the **Erdős-Rényi** (ER) and **Barabási-Albert** (BA) network models to capture different structural characteristics of real-world networks. The BA model provides us with a scale-free network, where well-connected individuals may have disproportionate influence over the evolution of the opinions both within and between groups. Group identity is limited to a simple binary division through using generic party affiliations as node attributes rather than through emergent network structures. In this way we can focus on the role that certain elite individuals within the population, identifeid by the disproportionate number of individuals they are connected to, can influence behavior. The ER model will serve as our control group instead of a complete graph. Because we are focused on the degree distribution of our network, it is important that our control group have the similar degree-related properties as the BA graph without sharing the same degree distribution. The ER graph allows us to control the size, order, connectivity and, therefore, average degree of the network without having any structure in the degree distribution of the network.

Our model is constructed in several stages. Each stage is described in seperate folders here in GitHub.

1. Network Generation
2. Node Attributes (including both group identity and initial opinions assignments)
3. Simulation
4. Polarization
5. Stabilization

In brief, after generating a BA graph and ER graph, every node is assigned a group identity (red or blue) and initial opinion (0 or 1). These attributes are all of the ingredients necessary for the polarization algorithm to work. During simulation, the algorithm is applied to the network for a given number of timesteps, and the results are stored in an SQLite database. In the Polarization and Stabilitzation sections, we test hypotheses related to the stable state (polarization) and convergence time (stabilization).

Our work on polarization suggests that which opinion is the most popular among the nodes tomorrow is not a function of which opinion is the most popular among the nodes today but rather is a function of which opinion is affiliated with the greatest number of edges today. In this way, high degree nodes (e.g. celebrities, mass media, etc., i.e. 'elites') have a measurably greater influence over the evolution of popular opinions, such that only a very small number of individuals can completely flip the political opinions of an entire party if they coordinate their message beforehand. How many elites are required depends on the shape of the degree distribution. However, our work on stabilization shows that these elites most work very quickly if they which to reach a consensus before inertia sets in. This inertia is accelerated by a tolerance for opposing viewpoints in the general population, dramatically shortening the timeframe elites have to change the narrative before a new stable state is reached.

This project was originally constructed using JupyterHub on an EC2 instance in AWS. Much of our work, including our entire SQLite db and all of our Polarization analysis, is still in JupyterHub, waiting to be ported here. Please be patient. Thank you.